Okay, it's going now. That was terrific. To start
at the lowest level was just about the most fun you
could have.
Maybe some girl will like you at the end of the
night. Of course, there's always some guy that
takes a fancy to her, so he wants to beat you up, so
you get to practice fighting at the same time. That
was interesting. That was always the way it was. I
don't care Somebody comes and says, let's leave at
once. I say, yeah, yeah, let's go. And then all of a
sudden, some clowns come skulking up. Hey, man, I
like her. I say, well, that's the brakes, bubba.
No, it ain't neither. So you practice all that
stuff. But if you're a delinquent to begin with,
you don't care. I didn't care. You win, you lose.
So that was the only reason I'm talking about that.
That's why I decided I didn't really feel sorry for
struggling musicians that I've encountered on
tour. So you look at the Rock and Roll Pyramid, all
the money is up at the top. Thousands and millions
of people are languishing, making no money
whatsoever, or $5 a night. As long as they don't
fancy that they're embarked on some kind of big
career trip, that's fine. If you can enjoy the
level you're at, it's a very great thing.
What could be more fun than being in the band? I
think it's great.
Am I jealous that Barry Manilow makes all this
money? No, but I think it's ridiculous.
Okay. Where do you think the velvet's fed into,
though? musical scene in the 60s? Or do you think
they were just more or less remembered? Well, we
didn't really.
We seemed to fit a whole lot better into the late 70s
and 80s.
We were sort of minimalist and direct. All we did is
we were kind of heavy metal sometimes and
Lyrically, we're kind of weird. We never did fit
into the mainstream, obviously. We sold
trillions of records.
But you could hear where we came from. You could
hear this R&B in there. You really can in the early
stuff. I don't deceive myself. Somebody just gave
me a tape of a group in the Netherlands doing Run,
Run, Run and Sunday Morning. In Run, Run, Run, they
They correctly isolate the essential R&B riff in
it, and then in fact emphasize it on the chorus.
Run, run, run, take a drag or two, that thing.
They use a walking bass line, which it would really
have if it were done by Bobby Blue Bland or
somebody. They really picked up on it as an R&B
inspired thing, and just emphasized it. So
there's always this sort of thing.
European Sun, we had, frequently we had different
titles for the songs. European Sun, we used to
talk, we used to refer to as John Lee Hooker,
because it has an old John Lee Hooker riff buried
under there someplace. John Lee Hooker was great.
He's a sad case, back to I was thinking about the
perils of folk singing and selling out. A lot of
these black R&B guys put down their steel strings
and got these old gut string guitars and started
playing for little white kids. This was horrible.
John Lee Hooker being one of them started popping
up in coffee houses as sort of a black folk singer.
I'd be out there. I heard him once do that. I said,
no, no, no. He had all these old John Lee Hooker
records where he had bands. Boy, they were great,
great
things. But who could blame him? He was signed on
for life. I wasn't. I was just some white kid. While
I liked to play, I liked to play. I still like to
play. It's just very... I don't want to go into it on
this thing. Why does that count? I did have a little
experiment here in Austin, 77 to 79, and ended
unhappily. All I wanted to do was be a roadhouse
band, fabulously successful. I'm not kidding. We
set house records and we invented the Continental
Club and all that sort of thing. We're fondly
remembered. And it collapsed because of
ambition. All these people secretly they're
friends of mine before we saw the play together
secretly thought that um if i did it for a while
immediately i'd want to start writing again and
calling people in new york and going on tour and
making records and like i said then they got
furious so it's okay for you because you already
did it i said well yeah you're right so maybe you
want to find somebody else who really wants to do it
and go do it so that brought all that down it was
unfortunate
I was here once this summer, and I saw a flyer for a
band, Femme Fatale. Oh, Femme Fatale. Yeah. I
don't know. It's a stock phrase. I wonder if they
play this song. But you see an influence that the
Velvets had on some later stuff. The punk
movement, heavy metal, and some of the new wave,
like I believe Rick Ocasek of the Cars has
mentioned the Velvets as a primary influence.
Yeah. Well, his drummer came by way of the Modern
Lovers. Jonathan Richmond was like our protege
from the time he was 14 years old. Hung around with
us and all that sort of thing. Yeah, that's all kind
of nice.
See, the material is always there. It hasn't been
overplayed on the radio. In fact, it hasn't been
played there at all. It was banned from the radio,
and even advertising for it was banned. So it's
very easy to make those kind of exciting personal
discoveries. You want to hear something that
really hasn't been played to death, it's our old
stuff. We did sell enough records, though, we
really did. Compared to the cars, we haven't. But
we did okay. Still doing okay royalty-wise.
So I don't feel bad about that. But I wasn't in it for
a business I don't know. If you're interested in
business, go work for your uncle in the hardware
store. Same
kind of thing. But it is flattering to be an
influence. Flattering, but not profitable. But
what endures and what doesn't? Money doesn't. I
would rather be well thought of than be some
schmuck with a whole lot of money that everybody
despises.
A category which includes many of my
contemporaries.
Did you see the Volvets as any influence on society
at the time, or just an extension of the
avant-garde and beatnik society in New York at the
time? We're not an influence because it was a
closed society from the beginning.
You couldn't join because you couldn't get in. in a
kind of, it was not anything that was marketable or
exploitable. We had kind of fashion connections,
you know, through paraphernalia and Betsy
Johnson. But Betsy talks in the biography about
how the impression was that everybody is on our
wavelength and doing all these crazy things,
where in fact very few people were, numerically.
What is the high glamour crowd doing right this
minute? Well, I'm not sure.
I was just in New York. It's not a whole lot of...
Billy Idol looks like all the rest of the people who
are trying to look like Billy Idol. So there's
nothing particularly distinctive about the way
we dressed. We were slobby. By turns. We had real
good clothes at other times. Betsy made clothes
for us. We certainly bought enough of them. We
never wore them. I had great stuff. I used to lose
most of
it. I remember just wearing T-shirts and jeans.
We didn't try to influence anything. There were
clothing stores called the Velvet Underground.
There was a chain. It may still be But that wasn't
based on anything that we wore in particular. The
girls in, I don't think we were responsible for S&M
styles, perhaps. Jim Morrison got the idea for
leather pants from Gerard Malanga. We were the
first to do any of that kind of stuff.
But weirdo dressing was, that's rock and roll to
the roots. Screamin' Jay Hawkins in his leopard
suits. Big Bopper, the first time I saw him was
wearing a leopard skin suit. I said, what the hell
is that? They said, it's a big bopper. I said, oh.
That makes it OK. Oh, yeah.
We never set out to be a fashion influence. We
didn't try and dream up our own equivalent of
beetle suits.
Okay, this should wind it up. What do you think, why
has the band, why have you broke up and gone your
separate ways? You said you got tired of living
that hostile analysis. Well, I would have gotten
tired of it eventually.
Just squabbles, I would say, kind of wore us down.
Just speculating on that in the biography. It's
hard to say.
See, Lou more or less, well, Lou forced John out,
which I didn't like. So I stewed on that for a good
while. And I was pretty, I stuck it to Lou whenever I
got a chance on account of that. And then Lou
eventually left under pressures and shifting
times, a shifting decade. Lou was a little put out,
I would say, in 1970.
So I stayed playing after Lou left, but I was always
looking around to see where I'd go in graduate
school. So I just sent out a few applications.
I had all the numbers and stuff, so I knew I'd get in.
I figured I'd get some support. I was right.
But after Lou left, he tried to talk me into doing a
thing with him.
Just me and you. We'll go to Europe and put together
a whole new thing. We'll be far away from these
poisonous idiots who are bothering us all the
time. It's very nice to have a scene that,
we'll say, reveres you. loves you or something
like that. Well, you are surrounded by people
you've known a long time and very close to,
socially. It has this negative
corollary that they feel close enough to you in
everything you do to
complain long and bitterly about everything that
you do. They don't think you ought to be doing it. We
hear all these harangues about what we ought to be
doing. Why weren't we? You know, people looking
out for your own best interests. You hear enough of
this stuff. After a while, you figure, what is
happening? You know, on our case, we're not
bothering anybody. So Luthor, perhaps we ought to
just go to Europe and hide out. Do like we did
before. If
Lou John and I go into a room for two weeks,
something's going to come out at the end of it. A
whole lot. We always knew that. We could turn on
material instantly. Tons of our stuff had never
even recorded. We'd practice it, and then once we
had it down, we lost interest. And then the things
that are really a challenge, let's see if we can
make this work. Remember what we were trying to do
the other night? Let's see if we can get that to be
something. So then we go do that with great energy
and forget all the things that we rehearsed that
we're supposed to be recording. That's good and
it's bad. Recorded pieces often don't sound
really polished. That's good and it's bad.
But it does have the benefit of, let's say, sincere
energy. It is fresh and you have some desire. Like
that Rolling Stones thing, it's only rock and
roll, but I like it. The way that sounds sounded to
me like they must have hashed that out the way we
used to. There's so much more that it needs or could
have. That could have been a really slick, major
Rolling Stone effort. But it wasn't. They were
content to leave it as it was. I like it fine. It's
only rock and roll, but I like it. And that's all.
The way the song is reflects exactly what it's
talking about. Is it rock and roll? Yeah. Well,
that's good enough. That's all this is. I like it.
You think it ought to have horns. You think it ought
to have a better bass part. You think it ought to
have a guitar solo. Too bad, it doesn't. Still,
rock and roll, this is all you get. And we always
avoided the gratuitous guitar fill.
I always hate guitar fills. I like them. I think
they're great. One, appropriate. But every time
the singer stops, isn't the signal for the guitar
player to start flapping? So we avoided that
pretty much. You know, it's all our songs. That's a
tendency picked up by the new wavers. They avoid
the fills religiously. It's nice to have a little
running riff. Oh, it's nice to throw a fill in here
and there. But that sounds too much like the
electric blues freaks who were running wild in the
60s, too. I contended that the blues revival was
over because they played all the notes. There were
no notes left in any combination that hadn't been
played. The entire permutation had been strung
out. It was impossible to play two musical phrases
that hadn't been played by somebody sometime or
other. I said, therefore, give it up. I have to find
something else. John Carroll playing blues, when
he first came over from England, that would have
been terrific. He didn't know any blues works. The
Welshman Sings the Blues.
That would appeal to me. The Welsh academician
sings the blues. Sings American Negro blues. That
would have been a great album. That would have
astounded everybody. I can't imagine what it
would have been. But you know what I mean. If you
can't avoid cliches no matter how hard you try,
then you really ought to I ride a different horse
and mix my metaphors. Who wants to play electric
blues? All I can do is play it as well as Johnny
Winter did it last week. Maybe not as well, but
better. Just, oh yeah, yeah, that's clearly
influenced by it. It's impossible to be totally
original. You don't have to be totally derivative
either. A good blues band was Siegel Schwal.
Chicago guys, white. religious blues purists.
Sound good.
Kind of like early Butterfield, but even more
rooted, shall I say.
You know what I say about that? Is this thing
picking up anything? It should be. I think it's
over. I don't know. I have a way of swallowing my
words. Okay. Okay, finis. That's it. Now we can go
over to the union.